Namaste everyone and good morning it's
my privilege to be able to introduce
someone who I've gotten to know really
well throughout the last few years and
your keynote speaker here this morning
Shri Rajiv Malhotra G Rajiv G is a
public intellectual scholar and very
prolific writer and speaker after a
successful career in business he
dedicated his life to furthering
understanding of the dhic Traditions
here in the west as well as around the
world in order to do this he EST lished
the infinity Foundation based out of
Princeton New Jersey in order to endow
scholarly and field projects that
explored often forgotten Knowledge from
India and explored rarely Trot in topics
in comparative religion and Hinduism
studies author of five bestselling books
including most recently the Battle of
Sanskrit and academic Hindu phobia we
just released Rajiv G is always
thought-provoking please give a
brotherly Philadelphia welcome to Shri
Rajiv manot
[Applause]
Namaste I'm delighted to be here for
this very important uh day and want to
thank all the organizers who put this
together the
topic I have is to discuss
discuss
how to situate
yoga in the context
of things that are familiar to us like
science religion
cultures nationality ethnicity and so
on and there have been controversies I
want to
address with the hope of bringing Unity
because yoga means yog means Unity
so I want to talk about the issues that
are there so we can resolve them there
are issues like is yog
Indian is yog
Hindu that kind of
thing
and you will see I try to present a new
framework in which to think about these
issues and this framework will lead to
Unity which is the spirit of
yoga and I will also try to convince you
that the debates that have been going on
are actually in a no- win situation and
are divisive because of the way they've
been
framed I'll start with a history of how
we got
here in the'
60s there was a huge import of yog and
various other related Lifestyles from
India
as part of the counterculture in the
United States America had a crisis of
myth with the Vietnam War and many other
things and many
Americans so-called hippies at that time
went to India had gurus got initiated
practiced many things and got huge
amounts of benefit some of them stayed
there some of them came back they
learned things like meditation they
learned mantra Mantra became part of the
American vocabulary and chakras and
Tantra a lot of vegetarianism became
popular some amazing things
happened the Divine as feminine is a
very central part of our tradition our
Vic Hindu tradition yoga is a part of
that so this was something new a lot of
feminists found for the first time that
they could they could respect worship
the Divine as feminine which wasn't
there in the abrahamic religions so some
amazing new things came to American
culture and then there was this idea of
the sacredness of the cosmos the Earth
as sacred the the Eco feminism movement
started by wand Shiva from India and and
became very widespread in the American
uh
counterculture so along with this came
philosophies like non-dualism vidanta
and things of that
sort now these things in the last 40
years 50
years have become digested into American
culture which means they become
Americanized so when you distill
something into
various elements various parts you you
know you have you get many things out of
it so the physical yoga what you may
call the YMCA yoga or the yoga for
health and stress reduction and so on is
one kind of an output of that and many
people sort of incorrectly think that
that's the all of yoga well that's just
one as one aspect of it and then yoga
also got christianized there's Christian
Yoga and so there's many different kinds
of yoga that came and yoga also became
studied by science neuroscientists
wanting to know the effects on the Mind
healing as part of health so it became
part of medicine holistic
medicine and therapy there are so many
clinical
Therapies in uh psychology cognitive
behavior cognitive therapies that are
based on this on on
yoga so yoga kind of got taken apart and
this into many
components and the
the so these have unfortunately become
separated as isolated
domains the people who study uh the
neuroscientific
effects aren't necessarily connected
with biti or
devotion for
example and people who are
into just yoga for health and exercise
might
not be fully aware of the higher States
Of Consciousness that are
achievable then
came a huge wave of Indian diaspora into
this
country and that started a conversation
on who owns yoga what is
Yoga is it Eastern Western is it Hindu
is it Christian is it secular is it
medical is it it to for enlightenment
purposes what is it and this is a very
good thing because debates when resolved
properly can lead to higher
[Music]
understanding
now the debates on how to locate and
situate yoga have been
framed in terms of categories like
religion and I don't think yoga fits
that or science in a very material sense
and yoga doesn't fit that or just health
and that's too
narrow so I want
to put these aside for the next few
minutes and I want to discuss yog in its
own
terms what is yoke in its own framework
we need to understand that and then we
can say what might be the relationship
of X or Y with this
framework so in
[Music]
yog there
are required injunctions dos and don'ts
called yum
andam it's not just you do this exercise
and you do this breathing and you reduce
your stress and you are
done even before you are taught that the
first principles of ethics ethics
lifestyle are taught so you cannot
separate it from ethics you cannot say
that well you know because it's
Universal therefore anything
goes a medicine when a doctor gives you
a
medicine he will also tell you how to
take it you cannot take certain things
with it you must have a certain diet you
must must have some lifestyle so the
fact that the medicine will work on
anybody is true but the but whoever it
works on must comply with the with the
methods with the teaching so similarly
yoga is universal but the yogi who's
doing it has to comply with certain
requirements C these are yum andam these
are lifestyle requirements so it is
universal doesn't matter what you your
background or whatever might be but you
have to comply with certain requirements
so that's the debate the debate is on
what are the requirements that yog has
in order for it to work properly a
doctor will also tell you that certain
other medicines are contraindicated they
will conflict conflict with it they will
clash with it it might do you harm it
might put you or your health in danger
so just because this is a good medicine
and it works doesn't mean that it works
no matter what you do no matter how
careless you are no matter how you
disrespect it so yog also has certain
things I will mention I'll give some
examples which are
contraindicated it is universal but
there are some contraindicated practices
diets Lifestyles ideologies that will
not go well with yog so its universality
is not what what we are questioning
we're just saying that it comes as a
package
deal a an expert on
plants and I'm working with some
somebody we are developing a
garden will tell you that this
particular plant should not be grown
next to that kind of a tree it's not
very good they'll tell you what kind of
sunshine or shade it needs what kind of
water it needs what kind of Direction
where it should be so the fact that
yog has to be practiced also implies a
certain kind of soil a certain kind of
climate a certain vibration a certain
ambias has to be part of your yoga
practice which is why your yoga teacher
will tell you to respect your mat take
your shoes off certain bowing certain
Mantra certain chanting certain
affirmations in your life
nonharming what we call aimsa these are
all part of the cultural or ethical soil
in which yoga is to be practiced so
universality doesn't mean you do
whatever you feel like that's a moronic
idea of universality I have so many
people like this morning somebody on my
Facebook page says Y Yoga is universal
is doing good to everybody what is all
this humbug about you know where it
works how it works what the requirements
are and so on the point is when a doctor
tells you the requirements for taking a
medicine or somebody with installs a
tree and says this is the way you take
care of the tree that is not humbug that
is part of the science of that
particular mechanism
now the issue of the scope of
yog has to be understood much broader
than people usually do there is the yog
at the individual level which is
practices that are body practices and
there's a wide range of these body
practices and this this includes
pranayam which is the breath control it
includes Tantra it includes medit
meditation it includes Mantra various
techniques that different systems have
the ultimate goal of this at the
individual level is to take you to
Enlightenment a state of consciousness
it is called J MTI it is here and now
and not in heaven it is not something
promised to you after you die it happens
to you now in your body as you are
living so a belief system which blocks
that
a belief system which says you are you
are Born Sinner has a blockage because
yog says you
are eternally Divine you are born Divine
you're intrinsically Divine the term is
sachitanand so everyone is inherently
Divine that's there is a there is an
issue there you have to resolve it you
have to come to terms there's no brand
name issue on what religion you call it
it's a question of ideology and
metaphysics you have have to have a
consistent metaphysics with the
principles of yog and you can anyone can
practice of any background but they have
to understand that they must be aligned
with the yog
metaphysics and the yog metaphysics is
very clear on the nature of the self the
first thing that has to be understood is
who am I the one who's going to do yog
it is it this body is it this mind well
of course those are part of it but who
else am I and is this this being that I
am what is its relationship with the
cosmos and with the Divine and so the
answers you get may be in alignment and
conducive to your yogic path or may be
in conflict and block it so this is an
issue that is a metaphysical issue it's
a theological issue it can't be wished
away it is not humbug and it is not
something that violates the universalism
it merely says that the universalism
Works within a certain um within a
certain of ethics and ideas and
practices beyond the individual yog is
also second person I you my relationship
whether it's family whether it's
Community whether it's Society whether
it's Humanity at large whether it's
animals I you also applies to trees
applies to mountains applies to Rivers
applies to the ecosystem and the whole
Cosmos so the yogis relationship with
what's out there as I you is very
different than saying
it when you look at when you look at
something and say this is a thing it and
when you look at the same entity and say
you is's a whole difference because
there's a person personhood there so
seeing the cosmos as person as a Divine
manifestation is a very important part
of yoga and this is this has theological
implications you have to understand and
then there is a third person which is
ideas metaphysics Concepts so yog is
very much related to the vidanta
philosophy with and of course there's
many schools and many variations of how
we interpret it but it cannot be
divorced from that it cannot so whether
it is the individual practice of yog or
whether it is the collective practice of
us our yog or whether it is abstract
ideas and Concepts and philosophies and
so on yog cannot be just surgically cut
out and transplanted somewhere else it's
like taking a plant and putting it into
a soil or a water system or a climate
which is hostile to it or toxic to it so
yog is universal but it does have its
own scientific principles of uh
compliance that people must be aware of
now this is a very uh big and long
concept subject that I've opened note
that in my
explanation I didn't use word like
Indian or Hindu or Christian or Bible I
did not use reference points which lot
of people start with that and therefore
they never get they never get to the
level of depth that I want to take you
to I want to put all those brand names
aside it has nothing to do with The
Branding of things in that sense it's
Universal but it does have principles it
does have practices it does have dos and
don'ts it does have things that are
consistent with it that will help you
and other things that will stop you and
some things that are outright dangerous
for your practice so universalism
doesn't mean that anything goes that's a
major confusion that uh people have
there are there's a recent uh
announcement by a prominent uh Guru that
just as science has no uh you know
science doesn't uh belong to anybody so
also yoga doesn't belong he's right in
the sense that it doesn't belong in
sense of ownership but that doesn't mean
that the universality of yog means that
you can mix it with whatever you feel
like and you can graft it into any
ideology or any practice or any diet
system that you feel like so yoga links
with India and with the Vic tradition
are because of the principles I
mentioned because because there are
certain world views metaphysics ideas of
who I am what is the purpose of life who
are we all how is the C what is the
cosmos where it came from these these
ideas are very intrinsic to yog because
yog is in a product of certain World
Views and practices very much that are
Vic so yes it is universal and yes
everybody can and should use it the it's
like a tree it's fruit everybody can
enjoy but the roots are very specific
roots for that tree they have to be
nurtured you have to nurture the roots
and the fruits can be exported to all
parts of the world and this the roots
and the soil are intertwined the climate
is
intertwined so this is a this is a large
subject I won't go into now but uh any
further but in the afternoon there is a
Q&A someone's going to interview me par
is going to interview me so I hope uh I
we will be able to go into more detail
and I will see you later namaskar thank
you
[Applause]